---
title: The World Health Organization and Political Entropy
subtitle: "It works like this. All institutions have administrators, and there will always be a small portion of those administrators who are inept, corrupt, and who poorly manage their private lives."
description: "It works like this. All institutions have administrators, and there will always be a small portion of those administrators who are inept, corrupt, and who poorly manage their private lives."
slug: the-world-health-organization-and-political-entropy
date: 2020-05-01
tags: ["article", "politics", "philosophy"]
layout: layouts/post.njk
permalink: /articles/{{ slug }}/index.html
---

In March of 2020, Vijaya Gadde, Head of the Legal, Policy, and Trust division of Twitter, and Matt Derella [wrote a post outlining Twitter’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic](https://blog.twitter.com/en_us/topics/company/2020/An-update-on-our-continuity-strategy-during-COVID-19.html). They explained Twitter would be expanding its definition of harm to include `“content that goes directly against guidance from authoritative sources of global and local public health information.”` The following month, in the same vein, [Susan Wojcicki told CNN](https://edition.cnn.com/videos/business/2020/04/19/inside-youtubes-numerous-policy-changes-during-the-pandemic.cnn/video/playlists/business-reliable-sources/) that YouTube would take steps to remove information that is `“medically unsubstantiated”`, which in operation means `“anything that would go against the World Health Organization’s recommendations.”`

By this time, COVID-19 was considered a serious issue, and such measures in this context appear perfectly reasonable and innocuous. I would hate for myself to be the victim of misinformation. The issue at stake here is made clear by the fact that many of the new media personalities, personalities derided as trolls, grifters, and conspiracy theorists by the old media were the ones who called it earlier and more accurately than the supposed `“authoritative sources of global and local public health information.”`

By this time, COVID-19 was considered a serious issue, and such measures in this context appear perfectly reasonable and innocuous. I would hate for myself to be the victim of misinformation. The issue at stake here is made clear by the fact that many of the new media personalities, personalities derided as trolls, grifters, and conspiracy theorists by the old media were the ones who called it earlier and more accurately than the supposed “authoritative sources of global and local public health information.”

The American Mind [published an essay on February 1st](https://americanmind.org/essays/rip-globalism-dead-of-coronavirus/) by one such alleged internet troll, Curtis Yarvin – formerly known as Mencius Moldbug – calling out the WHO’s mismanagement of situation as it was unfolding. Days before, on the 27th of January, Hong Kong’s leading virologist, Dr. Gabriel Leung, [gave a press briefing](https://www.straitstimes.com/asia/east-asia/wuhan-virus-draconian-travel-curbs-needed-to-halt-spread-say-scientists) saying “we have to be prepared that this particular epidemic may be about to become a global epidemic,” and that “substantial, draconian measures limiting population mobility should be taken sooner, rather than later.” Three days after this briefing, [the WHO edited out four lines](https://cnsnews.com/article/international/patrick-goodenough/coronavirus-who-scrubbed-website-document-underline) from its document declaring the coronavirus a threat. Those lines, calling for case-by-case considerations of when to consider trade and travel restrictions, were replaced with a single sentence: “The Committee does not recommend any travel or trade restriction based on the current information available." At the time of writing, the whole document has been scrubbed from its site.

WHO had declared that based on the information it received from Chinese studies, there was no evidence of human-to-human transmission of the coronavirus. Later, [Taiwanese health minister Chen Shih-chung revealed a December 31st email](https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/11395934/taiwan-coronavirus-warning-who-human-transmission-china/) to WHO describing potential cases of human-to-human transmission. Taiwanese doctors and scientists had learned from their colleagues in China that such infections were taking place. Taiwan able to shut down travel to and from China, and drastically stop the virus in its tracks; all the while, WHO had officially insisted there was no such threat.

WHO’s authoritative and official narrative lead to disastrous mismanagement, making the coronavirus an accountability crisis that rippled through the ruling classes of countries across the world. The outflow of mismanagement trickled into petty partisan battles about which of their parties were the bigger fuck-ups. Those arguments, to me, are just distracting political entertainment – rage porn enjoyed by people seeking strong emotional reactions from the pixels and text on their screens. To those with more temperate dispositions, what they see going on around them looks like a messy patchwork of underreactions and overreactions – state, regional, and national governments failing to nail down that sweet spot between widespread unnecessary deaths and a worldwide economic depression, leading to famines and armed conflicts.

In a recent podcast [episode of The Portal](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_b4qKv1Ctv8&t=753s), Eric Weinstein explains that in the last two decades, there was a lot of academic literature being published that called for stockpiling ventilators and preparing the medical system for future influenza outbreaks. The literature went largely ignored. Weinstein has a hypothesis based on this fact. He asks, what if our leadership class is reacting to this as the accountability crisis it is, rather than the health crisis it is communicating to the public.

They aren’t concerned much about the number of deaths – [a look at the CDC’s tracking of influenza death rate](https://gis.cdc.gov/grasp/fluview/mortality.html) reveals a curve the same shape and volume as the COVID death rate curve, only shifted forward a week or so ahead. Both the 2019-20 season influenza and COVID-19 are baring out the same results. The issue is entirely about the optics of an unforeseen pandemic, rather than the expected one. Both these diseases are killing the same volume of people, yet the crisis is over the unpreparedness of the unforeseen deaths rather than the foreseen deaths.

The leadership class is scrambling over the optics of the kind of deaths, specifically, the deaths that are a result of having ignored twenty years of warnings about hospitals being unprepared for even the predictable outbreaks of known diseases. These sorts of deaths border on criminal negligence, and so our leadership classes have shifted the responsibility on us. Normally, you quarantine the sick and not the healthy population, but being that the authoritative sources of global and public health information had not properly prepared for this, we all have to undergo draconian measures to help them process the burden they put on themselves. Now, each of us shares a small piece of the blame for the criminal negligence. These measures were communicated to us via celebrity-endorsed public service announcements with fun catchphrases like “flatten the curve”.

Why do I belabor this point? Because the way you are seeing the ruling class manage our public lives is the same kind of desperate behavior of people who poorly manage their own private lives. There are is an apocryphal “three laws of politics” that have been attributed to historian Robert Conquest. Each of them has a peculiar resemblance to the laws of thermodynamics. The second law, for example, _any organization that is not explicitly right-wing sooner or later becomes left-wing._ For the unpoetic and humorless, this is merely a tongue-in-cheek way of applying the concept of entropy to bureaucratic management. It describes a phenomenon that has been called “antinomianism” – political entropy.

It works like this. All institutions have administrators, and there will always be a small portion of those administrators who are inept, corrupt, and who poorly manage their private lives. It is in the best interest of institutions to keep their inept administrator ratio below some threshold, say 20%. It will never be 0%, and may never be below 10%, but if they can keep the ratio low, institutions should be able to shoulder that level of wasteful corruption for some time. But if the ratio is too high, mismanagement becomes the norm. The institution builds up fragilities that will lead to a crisis on the scale we see now.
